In January 2018,
a historic event was held in Denmark.
Over 51,000 viewers
were tied in live
from 500 different locations
all over Scandinavia.
The New World Translation of the Bible
was simultaneously released
in three languages:
Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish.
It’s easy to read, and it carefully
conveys the original message.
What is most outstanding
with the New World Translation
is that it has restored God’s name
according to the original text.
This is done out of respect
for the author of the Bible,
who says at Isaiah 42:8:
“I am Jehovah. That is my name.”
Unfortunately, too few Scandinavians
know God’s name,
though it can be found in various places
with either Hebrew
or Latin characters.
It is pronounced in slightly different ways.
What’s the history
of the divine name in Scandinavia?
Before the 16th century,
the name was almost unknown
because the Christian churches
mostly used
the Latin translation
of the Bible called the Vulgate.
Ordinary people didn’t understand Latin.
Moreover, God’s name was replaced
with titles such as “Lord.”
In the 16th century,
some brave and skilled men
translated the Bible
from the original languages where,
remarkably,
they discovered God’s name
written almost 7,000 times!
Sadly, these translators
followed the long history
of replacing God’s name with titles,
although several of them
retained God’s name at least a few times.
This burning desire to translate
the Bible soon came to Scandinavia
and also the knowledge of the divine name.
The first complete Danish Bible
was released in 1550
by King Christian III.
In 1604,
a Danish theologian
named Hans Poulsen Resen
met with King Christian IV
and pointed out some faults
in the Danish Bible translation.
He was granted approval to translate
the Bible directly from the Hebrew
and Greek texts into Danish.
Interestingly, it contained
God’s name in a marginal note.
The first Swedish translation
was released in 1541.
King Gustav II Adolf released
a revised version in 1618.
In a note on Exodus 6:3, it says:
“God reveals his name JEHOVAH, LORD.”
The first Scandinavian Bibles
were mostly meant for church use.
But now, people could at least listen
to God’s Word in their own language.
Even though God’s name was rarely used
in these early
Scandinavian Bible translations,
the name was discovered
and started to be used in other contexts
—for example, on coins.
God’s name was also used
in official royal mottos
of Swedish kings.
One of the mottos can even be found
on the front page of the Swedish law book
from 1608.
King Charles IX also instituted a Royal Order
called the Order of Jehovah.
Finally, a few translators took the important step
and reinstated Jehovah’s name
thousands of times in the Bible text.
The Danish priest Kalkar stated,
‘Why the expression “Jehovah”
is used instead of “Lord”
doesn’t even need to be defended.’
Some translators have shown
the same respect
for Jehovah’s name to this day.
The Bible contains
many other names that we feel free to use,
so why shouldn’t we use the name
of the only true God, Jehovah?
Because this translation uses his name,
it’s much easier to get to know the person
behind the name.
If I didn’t know God’s name,
it would have been difficult
for me to have a personal
and close relationship with him.
This translation will be perfect for us to use
when we teach our children.
I really look forward to using it to teach
others about God.
It’s amazing!
Thank you, Jehovah!
In one of the most secular areas
in the world,
God’s statement at Exodus 3:15
still proves to be true:
“Jehovah . . . is my name forever,
and this is how I am to be remembered
from generation to generation.”